---
title: Erlang
layout: post
date: 2016-01-19
---

# Erlang & Elixir

Elixir is the new cool kid of programming languages. Fast, concurrent, scalable,
maintainable, robust, fault tolerant, hot swappable... plus a great environment:
testing framework, package manager, database wrapper and a powerful interactive
console.

Elixir is getting all the attention, but a big part of its success belongs
to the Erlang Virtual Machine. In this post I will explain how and why Erlang
was born, along with the features that elixir is taking advantage of.

# Erlang

Erlang is a functional language created by Ericsson to power their mobile
telephone infrastructure, mainly telephone switches. Given the remote locations
of many of these switches and the peculiarities of the telecom business, Erlang
sought to meet this criteria:

* Support for a huge number of simultaneous users
* Minimal and remote maintenance
* No downtime

# Erlang features

In order to meet the requirements for the business logic, Erlang developed
a very interesting set of features:

* Structure based on lightweight processes: every calculation in Erlang is
done in an independent lightweight process (not to be confused with a thread
or an operating system process, both much heavier). This design allowed serving
and processing millions of small requests simultaneously, perfect for the job
of connecting users in the telephone switches.

* Asynchronous message passing: in order to share information between
different processes, Erlang uses asynchronous message passing instead of
shared variables.

* Distributed processing: the lightweight processes and the asynchronous
communication provide a very easy and robust way to implement distributed
systems. Since process communicate by messages, not by shared memory, it is
irrelevant if they live in the same machine or not. The asynchronous nature of
the messages avoids the need for a supervising hub that manages the
communications, and helps minimizing the effects of distance and network
problems between the processes. The distributed structure also makes very easy
to manage and maintain the system without physical access to the installation (again, very convenient for the business).

* Fault tolerance: fault tolerance in Erlang means that the system will not go
down even if a fatal error occurs. This is achieved by using supervision
processes, that watch over a set of processes and restarts them if any of them
fails (when, how many and in which order they are restarted depends on the
supervision strategy chosen). The difference between this and the more common
error catching is that Erlang does not manage the errors in any way, when an
error happens, the process will crash and die... and another one of the same
kind will immediately be spawned by the supervisor process. Being a new process,
the risk of errors creating inconsistencies is null.

* Hot swapping: the modularity of the Erlang applications plus its fast restart
capabilities allow for extremely fast updates and maintenance, without stopping
the services provided. This allows Erlang powered systems to have a very close
to zero downtime.

# A note about concurrency and Erlang
Concurrency is the ability to execute several computations simultaneously and
possibly interacting with each other. Concurrency has become part of programming
discussions just in the recent years, due to its relation to true multi-core
programming. Since most of the programming languages that we use today were
created before this kind of hardware existed, it is no surprise that they are
having a hard time implementing concurrency, it was not important when the
languages were designed.

Erlang (and Elixir) popularity recently is due to it being fully concurrent, and
thus able to get the most of modern hardware. How is this possible in a language
born in 1986? The answer is that Erlang just happens to be concurrent because
concurrency is a consequence of its distributed nature. The problem of having
several machines doing computations simultaneously is the same as having several
cores in a single machine doing those computations.
